안녕하세요? 저는 레드햇과 Xiph.Org 소속의 몬티 몽고메리입니다.
몇달 전, 저는 디지털 오디오와 왜 24비트/192kHz 음악을 다운로드하는 것이 말이 안 되는지에 대해 설명하는 글을 썼습니다.
그 글에서, 저는 지나가듯이 디지털 파형은 계단 형태가 아니라고 언급했습니다.
분명히, 디지털에서 아날로그로 다시 변환하면 분명 계단 형태의 신호가 나오지 않습니다.
그 문서에서, 이 부분이 많은 사람들이 지적한 가장 큰 부분입니다.
사실, 제가 받은 반 이상의 이메일이
기본적인 디지털 신호에 대한 질문과 의견이었습니다.
흥미로운 것이 있으니 잠시 몇몇 간단한 디지털 신호에 대해서 살펴보죠.
잠시 이렇다고 가정해보죠
디지털 신호가 어떻게 행동하는지 우리가 전혀 모른다고 말입니다.
그런 상황에선 디지털 측정기를 쓰는 것은
아무 의미가 없습니다.
다행히도, 이 실험에 관해서는
많은 아날로그 장비들이 여기 있습니다.
일단, 우린 신호 발생기가 필요합니다.
아날로그 입력 신호를 만들기 위해서 말이죠.
여기서는 1978년에 나온 HP3325가 있습니다.
이건 여전히 꽤 좋은 신호 발생기에요
여러분이 크기나
무게나
전력 소모나
시끄러운 팬을 신경쓰시지 않는다면
이베이에서 찾으실 수 있을 겁니다.
때로 배송비는 좀 더 들겠지만요.
다음으로, 우린 아날로그 파형을 아날로그 오실로스코프로 관찰할 겁니다.
이 90년대 중반에 나온 텍트로닉스 2246 같은 장비로요.
가장 마지막에 나온, 그리고 최고의 아날로그 스코프입니다.
가정 실험실에 꼭 필요하죠.
그리고 마지막으로, 신호의 주파수 스펙트럼을 분석할
아날로그 스펙트럼 분석기입니다.
신호 발생기와 같은 라인인 HP3585 같은 장비죠.
여기 있는 다른 장비들처럼 이 장비는 초보적이고
웃기게 큰 마이크로 컨트롤러를 갖고 있지만
입력에서부터 여러분이 화면에서 보는 신호 경로 상에서
모든 것이 아날로그입니다.
이 모든 것들은 오래되었지만
그 무게를 고려하지 않는다면
성능은 여전히 상당히 좋습니다.
지금, 우리는 신호 발생기가
실효값 1 볼트의 1 kHz 사인파를 만들도록 설정했습니다.
우리는 오실로스코프에서 사인파를 볼 수 있구요,
실제로 실효값 1 볼트의 1 kHz 신호임을 확인할 수 있죠.
최고-최저값이 약 2.8V임으로부터요.
또한 스펙트럼 분석기의 측정 결과와도 일치합니다.
분석기는 약간의 낮은 백색 잡음도 보여주네요.
그리고 몇몇 고주파 왜곡도요.
그 고조파 왜곡들의 최고점은 기본파보다 약 70 dB 정도 낮습니다.
이건 이번 실험에서 아무 문제가 되지 않지만,
저는 그래도 지적하고 싶었어요
나중에야 여러분이 깨닫지 않도록요.
이제, 중간에 디지털 샘플링 단계를 추가해보죠.
변환을 위해서, 우리는 재미없는
상용 수준의 eMagic USB 1 오디오 장치를 쓸 겁니다.
이것은 현재 기준으로 10년도 더 되었고
구식이 되어갑니다.
A recent converter can easily have an order of magnitude better specs.
Flatness, linearity, jitter, noise behavior, everything...
you may not have noticed.
Just because we can measure an improvement
doesn't mean we can hear it,
and even these old consumer boxes were already
at the edge of ideal transparency.
The eMagic connects to my ThinkPad,
which displays a digital waveform and spectrum for comparison,
then the ThinkPad sends the digital signal right back out
to the eMagic for re-conversion to analog
and observation on the output scopes.
Input to output, left to right.
OK, it's go time.
We begin by converting an analog signal to digital
and then right back to analog again with no other steps.
The signal generator is set to produce
a 1kHz sine wave just like before.
We can see our analog sine wave on our input-side oscilloscope.
We digitize our signal to 16 bit PCM at 44.1kHz,
same as on a CD.
The spectrum of the digitized signal matches what we saw earlier. and...
what we see now on the analog spectrum analyzer,
aside from its high-impedance input being just a smidge noisier.
For now
the waveform display shows our digitized sine wave
as a stairstep pattern, one step for each sample.
And when we look at the output signal
that's been converted from digital back to analog, we see...
It's exactly like the original sine wave.
No stairsteps.
OK, 1kHz is still a fairly low frequency,
maybe the stairsteps are just
hard to see or they're being smoothed away.
Fair enough. Let's choose
a higher frequency, something close to Nyquist, say 15kHz.
Now the sine wave is represented by less than three samples per cycle, and...
the digital waveform looks pretty awful.
Well, looks can be deceiving. The analog output...
is still a perfect sine wave, exactly like the original.
Let's keep going up.
16kHz....
17kHz...
18kHz...
19kHz...
20kHz.
Welcome to the upper limits of human hearing.
The output waveform is still perfect.
No jagged edges, no dropoff, no stairsteps.
So where'd the stairsteps go?
Don't answer, it's a trick question.
They were never there.
Drawing a digital waveform as a stairstep
was wrong to begin with.
Why?
A stairstep is a continuous-time function.
It's jagged, and it's piecewise,
but it has a defined value at every point in time.
A sampled signal is entirely different.
It's discrete-time;
it's only got a value right at each instantaneous sample point
and it's undefined, there is no value at all, everywhere between.
A discrete-time signal is properly drawn as a lollipop graph.
The continuous, analog counterpart of a digital signal
passes smoothly through each sample point,
and that's just as true for high frequencies as it is for low.
Now, the interesting and not at all obvious bit is:
there's only one bandlimited signal that passes
exactly through each sample point.
It's a unique solution.
So if you sample a bandlimited signal
and then convert it back,
the original input is also the only possible output.
And before you say,
"Oh, I can draw a different signal that passes through those points."
Well, yes you can, but...
if it differs even minutely from the original,
it contains frequency content at or beyond Nyquist,
breaks the bandlimiting requirement
and isn't a valid solution.
So how did everyone get confused
and start thinking of digital signals as stairsteps?
I can think of two good reasons.
First: It's easy enough to convert a sampled signal
to a true stairstep.
Just extend each sample value forward until the next sample period.
This is called a zero-order hold,
and it's an important part of how some digital-to-analog converters work,
especially the simplest ones.
So, anyone who looks up digital-to-analog conversion
is probably going to see a diagram of a stairstep waveform somewhere,
but that's not a finished conversion,
and it's not the signal that comes out.
Second,
and this is probably the more likely reason,
engineers who supposedly know better,
like me,
draw stairsteps even though they're technically wrong.
It's a sort of like a one-dimensional version of
fat bits in an image editor.
Pixels aren't squares either,
they're samples of a 2-dimensional function space and so they're also,
conceptually, infinitely small points.
Practically, it's a real pain in the ass to see
or manipulate infinitely small anything.
So big squares it is.
Digital stairstep drawings are exactly the same thing.
It's just a convenient drawing.
The stairsteps aren't really there.
When we convert a digital signal back to analog,
the result is also smooth regardless of the bit depth.
24 bits or 16 bits...
or 8 bits...
it doesn't matter.
So does that mean that the digital bit depth
makes no difference at all?
Of course not.
Channel 2 here is the same sine wave input,
but we quantize with dither down to eight bits.
On the scope, we still see a nice
smooth sine wave on channel 2.
Look very close, and you'll also see a
bit more noise.
That's a clue.
If we look at the spectrum of the signal...
aha!
Our sine wave is still there unaffected,
but the noise level of the eight-bit signal
on the second channel is much higher!
And that's the difference the number of bits makes.
That's it!
When we digitize a signal, first we sample it.
The sampling step is perfect; it loses nothing.
But then we quantize it,
and quantization adds noise.
The number of bits determines how much noise
and so the level of the
noise floor.
What does this dithered quantization noise sound like?
Let's listen to our eight-bit sine wave.
That may have been hard to hear anything but the tone.
Let's listen to just the noise after we notch out the sine wave
and then bring the gain up a bit because the noise is quiet.
Those of you who have used analog recording equipment
may have just thought to yourselves,
"My goodness! That sounds like tape hiss!"
Well, it doesn't just sound like tape hiss,
it acts like it too,
and if we use a gaussian dither
then it's mathematically equivalent in every way.
It is tape hiss.
Intuitively, that means that we can measure tape hiss
and thus the noise floor of magnetic audio tape
in bits instead of decibels,
in order to put things in a digital perspective.
Compact cassettes...
for those of you who are old enough to remember them,
could reach as
deep as nine bits in perfect conditions,
though five to six bits was more typical,
especially if it was a recording made on a tape deck.
That's right... your mix tapes were only about six bits
deep... if you were lucky!
The very best professional open reel tape
used in studios could barely hit...
any guesses?...
13 bits
with advanced noise reduction.
And that's why seeing 'DDD' on a Compact Disc
used to be such a big, high-end deal.
I keep saying that I'm quantizing with dither,
so what is dither exactly?
More importantly, what does it do?
The simple way to quantize a signal is to choose
the digital amplitude value closest
to the original analog amplitude.
Obvious, right?
Unfortunately, the exact noise you get
from this simple quantization scheme
depends somewhat on the input signal,
so we may get noise that's inconsistent,
or causes distortion,
or is undesirable in some other way.
Dither is specially-constructed noise that
substitutes for the noise produced by simple quantization.
Dither doesn't drown out or mask quantization noise,
it actually replaces it
with noise characteristics of our choosing
that aren't influenced by the input.
Let's watch what dither does.
The signal generator has too much noise for this test
so we'll produce a mathematically
perfect sine wave with the ThinkPad
and quantize it to eight bits with dithering.
We see a nice sine wave on the waveform display
and output scope
and...
once the analog spectrum analyzer catches up...
a clean frequency peak with a uniform noise floor
on both spectral displays
just like before
Again, this is with dither.
Now I turn dithering off.
The quantization noise, that dither had spread out
into a nice, flat noise floor,
piles up into harmonic distortion peaks.
The noise floor is lower, but the level of distortion becomes nonzero,
and the distortion peaks sit higher than the dithering noise did.
At eight bits this effect is exaggerated.
At sixteen bits,
even without dither,
harmonic distortion is going to be so low
as to be completely inaudible.
Still, we can use dither to eliminate it completely
if we so choose.
Turning the dither off again for a moment,
you'll notice that the absolute level of distortion
from undithered quantization stays approximately constant
regardless of the input amplitude.
But when the signal level drops below a half a bit,
everything quantizes to zero.
In a sense,
everything quantizing to zero is just 100% distortion!
Dither eliminates this distortion too.
We reenable dither and...
there's our signal back at 1/4 bit,
with our nice flat noise floor.
The noise floor doesn't have to be flat.
Dither is noise of our choosing,
so let's choose a noise as inoffensive
and difficult to notice as possible.
Our hearing is most sensitive in the midrange from 2kHz to 4kHz,
so that's where background noise is going to be the most obvious.
We can shape dithering noise away from sensitive frequencies
to where hearing is less sensitive,
usually the highest frequencies.
16-bit dithering noise is normally much too quiet to hear at all,
but let's listen to our noise shaping example,
again with the gain brought way up...
Lastly, dithered quantization noise is higher power overall
than undithered quantization noise even when it sounds quieter.
You can see that on a VU meter during passages of near-silence.
But dither isn't only an on or off choice.
We can reduce the dither's power to balance less noise against
a bit of distortion to minimize the overall effect.
We'll also modulate the input signal like this:
...to show how a varying input affects the quantization noise.
At full dithering power, the noise is uniform, constant,
and featureless just like we expect:
As we reduce the dither's power,
the input increasingly affects the amplitude and the character
of the quantization noise:
Shaped dither behaves similarly,
but noise shaping lends one more nice advantage.
To make a long story short, it can use
a somewhat lower dither power before the input
has as much effect on the output.
Despite all the time I just spent on dither,
we're talking about differences
that start 100 decibels below full scale.
Maybe if the CD had been 14 bits as originally designed,
dither might be more important.
Maybe.
At 16 bits, really, it's mostly a wash.
You can think of dither as an insurance policy
that gives several extra decibels of dynamic range
just in case.
The simple fact is, though,
no one ever ruined a great recording
by not dithering the final master.
We've been using sine waves.
They're the obvious choice when what we want to see
is a system's behavior at a given isolated frequency.
Now let's look at something a bit more complex.
What should we expect to happen
when I change the input to a square wave...
The input scope confirms our 1kHz square wave.
The output scope shows..
Exactly what it should.
What is a square wave really?
Well, we can say it's a waveform that's some positive value
for half a cycle and then transitions instantaneously
to a negative value for the other half.
But that doesn't really tell us anything useful
about how this input
becomes this output.
Then we remember that any waveform
is also the sum of discrete frequencies,
and a square wave is a particularly simple sum
a fundamental and
an infinite series of odd harmonics.
Sum them all up, you get a square wave.
At first glance,
that doesn't seem very useful either.
You have to sum up an infinite number of harmonics
to get the answer.
Ah, but we don't have an infinite number of harmonics.
We're using a quite sharp anti-aliasing filter
that cuts off right above 20kHz,
so our signal is band-limited,
which means we get this:
..and that's exactly what we see on the output scope.
The rippling you see around sharp edges in a bandlimited signal
is called the Gibbs effect.
It happens whenever you slice off part of the frequency domain
in the middle of nonzero energy.
The usual rule of thumb you'll hear is the sharper the cutoff,
the stronger the rippling,
which is approximately true,
but we have to be careful how we think about it.
For example...
what would you expect our quite sharp anti-aliasing filter
to do if I run our signal through it a second time?
Aside from adding a few fractional cycles of delay,
the answer is...
nothing at all.
The signal is already bandlimited.
Bandlimiting it again doesn't do anything.
A second pass can't remove frequencies that we already removed.
And that's important.
People tend to think of the ripples as a kind of artifact
that's added by anti-aliasing and anti-imaging filters,
implying that the ripples get worse
each time the signal passes through.
We can see that in this case that didn't happen.
So was it really the filter that added the ripples the first time through?
No, not really.
It's a subtle distinction,
but Gibbs effect ripples aren't added by filters,
they're just part of what a bandlimited signal is.
Even if we synthetically construct
what looks like a perfect digital square wave,
it's still limited to the channel bandwidth.
Remember the stairstep representation is misleading.
What we really have here are instantaneous sample points,
and only one bandlimited signal fits those points.
All we did when we drew our apparently perfect square wave
was line up the sample points just right so it appeared
that there were no ripples if we played connect-the-dots.
But the original bandlimited signal,
complete with ripples, was still there.
And that leads us to one more important point.
You've probably heard that the timing precision of a digital signal
is limited by its sample rate; put another way,
that digital signals can't represent anything
that falls between the samples...
implying that impulses or fast attacks have to align
exactly with a sample, or the timing gets mangled...
or they just disappear.
At this point, we can easily see why that's wrong.
Again, our input signals are bandlimited.
And digital signals are samples,
not stairsteps, not 'connect-the-dots'.
We most certainly can, for example,
put the rising edge of our bandlimited square wave
anywhere we want between samples.
It's represented perfectly
and it's reconstructed perfectly.
Just like in the previous episode,
we've covered a broad range of topics,
and yet barely scratched the surface of each one.
If anything, my sins of omission are greater this time around...
but this is a good stopping point.
Or maybe, a good starting point.
Dig deeper.
Experiment.
I chose my demos very carefully
to be simple and give clear results.
You can reproduce every one of them on your own if you like.
But let's face it, sometimes we learn the most
about a spiffy toy by breaking it open
and studying all the pieces that fall out.
That's OK, we're engineers.
Play with the demo parameters,
hack up the code,
set up alternate experiments.
The source code for everything,
including the little pushbutton demo application,
is up at Xiph.Org.
In the course of experimentation,
you're likely to run into something
that you didn't expect and can't explain.
Don't worry!
My earlier snark aside, Wikipedia is fantastic for
exactly this kind of casual research.
If you're really serious about understanding signals,
several universities have advanced materials online,
such as the 6.003 and 6.007 Signals and Systems modules
at MIT OpenCourseWare.
And of course, there's always the community here at Xiph.Org.
Digging deeper or not,
I am out of coffee,
so, until next time,
happy hacking!